Cyber threat intelligence (CTI) is a cyber security discipline that aims to produce actionable output after processing and interpreting the data collected from multiple sources, and to inform organizations against cyber attacks through these outputs to minimize damages

CTI LIFECYCLE:

Planning and Direction

The planning and directing phase should be the foundation of a structure that must function flawlessly. Planning is the part that allows us to find answers to questions such as what exactly is expected from intelligence, who will consume the intelligence obtained, and which teams or individuals will take action as a result of the intelligence obtained. Intelligence will be used by executives or a team of analysts. You can directly feed your SOC team with the intelligence obtained and/or present summary reports to your managers. At this point, what you want is important. Your requests will also clarify the scope of the intelligence. For example, an organization can determine the scope of intelligence it wants to obtain by asking the following questions:

Does your organization have a SOC team?

This question shows us whether there is a technical team that will actively use the intelligence obtained, and if there is, it is an indication that shows us we can go down to the technical details of the intelligence. If there is not a SOC team it indicates that the intelligence will be consumed by managers. In this case, an intelligence model that offers clearer and more understandable summaries can be taken as a basis, without being bogged down in technical details.

Has your organization been attacked before? If so, what was the success rate of the attack?

The fact that the organization was exposed to a high rate of successful attacks can be used to reduce the success rate of future attacks by putting the intelligence on the basis of the established structure, and the intelligence obtained with the data collected from the current attacks. This tells us how often we will use intelligence in the organization. It controls how often we pull data from internal and external sources. It is important that the intelligence obtained is constantly updated and consumed quickly for frequently attacked organizations.

Do the attacks target organization or individuals?

It is important to focus on the External Attack Surface Management area, which the intelligence contains, to make the threat surface as clear as possible and to follow it up regularly for attacks targeting the organization. External Attack Surface Management is to determine and manage the attack surface of organizations. It will be covered in detail in the following sections. For attacks targeting individuals, the Digital Risk Protection part is crucial. Digital Risk Protection defines the digital risks that organizations may face through the attack surface. It will be covered in detail in the following sections. It reveals that we need to clarify certain issues such as users' login credentials, their risks to be exposed to phishing attacks, and defining the strength of your password policy.

Are other companies in your industry exposed to the same attacks you received?

This question explains the need for us to turn to industry-based intelligence that provides us with intelligence about other companies in our industry. When other companies are getting attacked, industry-based intelligence provides us with the IOC (Indicators used to identify attacks digitally, and threat actors) related to that specific attack, and also it will allow us to avoid that attack with minimum damage if we are exposed to the same attack.

Information Gathering

The information collection stage is the part where we determine what sources we will collect data from. These resources can be both internal and external. Some of the sources we will collect data from are as follows:

Hacker Forums
Ransomware Blogs
Deep/Dark Web Forums and Bot Markets
Public Sandboxes
Telegram/ICQ/IRC/Discord/Twitter/Instagram/Facebook/LinkedIn
Surface Web(Cybersecurity Blogs etc.)
Public Research Reports
File Download Sites
Github/Gitlab/Bitbucket etc.
Public Buckets (Amazon S3/Azure Blob etc.)
Shodan/Binary Edge/Zoomeye vb.
Sources that provide IOC (Alienvault, Abuse.ch, MalwareBazaar vb.)
Honeypots
SIEM, IDS/IPS, Firewalls
Public Leak Databases


Processing

The data obtained is processed at this stage which may be considered a filter. We clean the data from false positives as much as possible, pass it through certain rule sets, and subject it to some correlations. At the end of this process, we get the information we need.

Analysis and Production

The information obtained is interpreted and analyzed at this stage and the consumable intelligence is obtained as a result of the output of the analysis. After this point, appropriate reports are to be prepared according to who will consume the intelligence.

Dissemination and Feedback

Dissemination of the intelligence appropriately is the next step for whom the intelligence is intended. For example, intelligence from external sources to the technical team should be distributed to other users in the organization through appropriate channels, and the necessary feedback should be given to make the intelligence better and more efficient at the end of the whole process. Let's say that content with the name of our organization is created through a site builder at the subdomain of letsdefend.blogspot.com. If the blogspot.com domain is marked as suspicious or harmful in the intelligence and not this subdomain, this will result in many false positives. In such cases, we need to improve the intelligence with feedback.



TYPES OF CYBERTHREAT INTELLIGENCE:

Technical Cyber ​​Threat Intelligence

Technical CTI can be considered as the output of more technical analysis studies based on IOCs. It is an output of the technical CTI to create certain rulesets and to protect the organization against attacks by using a report containing hashes of malicious IP addresses, phishing domains, and malicious files, and by investigating the information obtained from this report. This type of intelligence is generally used by the technical personnel (SOC Analyst, Incident Responder) in the organization.

Tactical Cyber ​​Threat Intelligence

Tactical CTI is used to understand the TTP (Technical, Tactical, Procedure) of the attackers by trying to find answers to certain questions. For instance, we have an intelligence report containing the TTP of an attacker named “mordecai”. When we go over this report we should be able to find answers to questions like “what vulnerabilities does the attacker use the most?”, “in which countries does the attacker operate?”, “what is the attacker's motivation?”, and “what methods does the attacker use?” to be able to protect our organization by taking precautionary measures against a possible attack. This intelligence is mostly provided for the management personnel (i.e. SOC Manager, etc.) who are leading the technical teams.

Operational Cyber Threat Intelligence

Operational CTI is often confused with Tactical CTI because they have so much in common. Operational CTI also focuses on the attackers' TTPs just like Tactical CTI but it is mostly used for Threat Hunting, unlike tactical CTI. While tactical CTI is a more automated process, operational CTI can focus on a specific type of attack, or a single attacker in particular, and carry out the investigation to a narrower scope. This type of intelligence can be used by Security Managers or Threat hunting personnel in the organization.

Strategic Cyber ​​Threat Intelligence

Strategic CTI is for the top executives of the organization. It is generally used for long-term tasks such as product purchasing, budgeting, and planning for the organization in the long run by weighing the tactical CTI outputs.


Determining the Attack Surface
The Importance of Attack Surface in Threat Intelligence
Today, classical threat intelligence models are falling short. The concept of External Attack Surface, which has recently entered the literature, has shown us this inadequacy and has closed the deficiencies. This concept has brought a new perspective to threat intelligence. The concept of Extended Threat Intelligence (XTI) has gained more popularity apart from classical intelligence. To define, XTI, unlike CTI, creates an attack surface belonging to the organization in order to produce intelligence specific to the organization. Thanks to this attack surface, organizations gain visibility. This visibility can be a forgotten endpoint or a forgotten subdomain. The main interest at this point is that organizations now know their inventories and clearly know which assets to defend against.

DETERMINING THE ATTACK SURFACE:

When creating the attack surface, domains, subdomains, websites, login pages, CMS applications, technologies used on websites, IP addresses, IP blocks, DNS records, C-level employee mails, network applications, operating systems, bin numbers, and swift codes, and SSL certificates will be included. We will determine all these by proceeding through the main domain, which was provided to us by the organization as per the scenario.

tools and recources can be found in resources file.


Threat Intelligence Data Interpretation
As explained in the previous section, the data collected for threat intelligence will be complex and very large, as we captured the data from multiple sources. If it is not processed properly, it will lead to many false positives and prevent us from producing quality threat intelligence. Therefore, we need to understand the data and interpret it properly. In this section, we will cover the cause and effect relationship that will be useful for us when we interpret the data rather than diving into the “Big Data Analysis” etc. as it is out of scope. Those who are curious about “Big Data Analysis” can easily find information about it online.

When analyzing data collected for threat intelligence, it is very important to weed out false data to avoid false positive situations. For example, if the hash belonging to one of Microsoft's legit applications is accidentally included in the intelligence data, this application will be marked as malicious within the organization. This will cause disruption of the processes that need to be done with that application within the organization. For this reason, we need to convert all the legitimate data such as IP addresses, hashes, domains, and URLs into a whitelist, apply it to filter, and clean and legitimate data of the intelligence. Regardless of the field, the data collected should be cleaned from false information. Before this process, we have to classify and label the complex structure to be able to navigate through the data faster and interpret it more easily. We can constantly be aware of threats through the bridge between the attack surface and the data by associating each classified data group with the relevant parts of our attack surface.


Using Threat Intelligence
After the data is interpreted in relation to the attack surface, it will become consumable threat intelligence. The intelligence obtained can be used in the following 3 different areas.

External Attack Surface Management (EASM)
Digital Risk Protection (DRP)
Cyber ​​Threat Intelligence (CTI)


When these 3 areas are combined, they form the XTI structure we mentioned at the beginning of our training. Each structure consumes intelligence by using it on different topics.

EXTERNAL SURFACE MANAGEMENT (EASM)

EASM is part of XTI, which manages organizations' outward assets. We explained how to create the attack surface, which is the basis of External Attack Surface Management, in the previous sections. In this section, we will cover how we manage the attack surface we have created and how it is fed from the collected intelligence.

Attack surface is essential for organizations to detect their unknown or forgotten assets and provide visibility and the EASM will come into play right at this point since any security vulnerability on these assets will pose a risk for the organization. Detected assets must be monitored constantly. For example, adding a newly purchased domain to the asset list immediately or deleting a discontinued domain from the asset list is a part of this monitoring effort. We can keep track of these assets through External Attack Surface Management. EASM will notify the user if a domain expires, the title of the website changes or a subdomain is created. One of the main factors that will provide intelligence in this section is the use of information obtained from the assets themselves. A second factor is using the intelligence produced as a result of the vulnerability data obtained from outside sources like Shodan, etc. In this part, we receive notifications about security vulnerabilities on our assets as a result of the intelligence we used.

In the section below, the alarms that may occur as a result of the active use of threat intelligence by EASM and the actions we can take are mentioned:

New Digital Asset(s) Detected

This is the warning we will encounter when a new asset is detected and added to our continuously monitored asset list. We need to check whether the asset really belongs to our organization and was created by the authorized users of our organization.

Domain Information Change Detected

It is the warning that alerts us when there is any change in the whois information of the domain in our asset list. We should check this activity to see if it is a harmful activity or not by comparing the old and the new data, and verifying if the change is made by the authorized users of our organization.

DNS Information Change Detected

This is the warning that alerts us when there is any change in the DNS records of the domain in our asset list. We should check this activity to see if it is a harmful activity or not by comparing the old and the new data, and verifying if the change is made by the authorized users of our organization.

DNS Zone Transfer Detected

This is the warning that alerts us when there is a change DNS Zone Transfer status of the domain in our asset list. We should check the DNS records for the relevant assets and verify if there is a zone transfer.

Internal IP Adress Detected

Since the IP addresses we specify in the A records of our domains are open to the public and can be seen outside of our network, they must not be internal IP addresses. If an internal IP is disclosed in the A record of a domain or subdomain, we will receive an alert that warns us of the “Internal IP Address Detected” on our EASM side. This may happen due to the lack of communication between different teams in our organization. In such cases, the process should be verified by contacting the POC of the DNS record maintenance and the root cause should be investigated. The IP should be changed if its use is not necessary.

Critical Open Port Detected

This is the warning that alerts us when there is an indication for open critical ports on the IPs that we are monitoring within the intelligence we received from sources such as “Shodan”. We should check the ports claimed to be open on the relevant IP addresses that we receive the alert, and we should close or filter them if they are not the ports used by our network actively. If the open ports are used actively, then we should update the services running on them and keep them up to date, and make sure that necessary configurations are complete.

SMTP Open Relay Detected

This is the warning that alerts us when there is an open relay status for our mail server which we monitor within our asset list. We should investigate the mail server in question and verify the status of the mail server by contacting the POC of the server.

SPF/DMARC Record Not Found

SPF and DMARC records are constantly checked for domains that we track in our asset list, and we receive this alert when these records are not found. These records must be configured correctly for the security of our mail servers. We need to contact the POC of our mail server and verify its status.

SSL Certificate Revoked/Expired

SSL certificates are one of the most important elements for secure communication. Our SSL certificates hosted on our domains should be monitored regularly within our asset list. We will receive this alert if one of our SSL certificates is expired or revoked. Any communication carried out without SSL poses high risks as the data is transmitted in clear text and can be seen by third parties. Therefore, we need to renew our SSL certificate as soon as possible when we receive this alert.

Suspicious Website Redirection

Sometimes we redirect some of our domains to some of our websites. If we do this frequently, we are likely to miss suspicious redirects. Therefore, we need to receive feeds that provide us with the status codes of our websites and where they are directed. If we receive this alert, it means that one of our domains in our asset list is redirecting to a website that is not in our asset list. This indicates a potential breach. We must urgently check the redirection and report the case to the relevant team that manages these issues.

Subdomain Takeover Detected

We receive this alert if a takeover is detected on a subdomain. This case should be investigated to find the DNS record that this takeover took place and the details should be shared with the team that will handle the case.

Website Status Code Changed

We receive this alert when the status code that our website returns back to us is changed. This warning comes to us from the data containing the status codes of the websites. In order to prevent service interruptions, the status code and the problem should be determined with its root cause, and the solutions to remediate the issue should be applied immediately.

Vulnerability Detected

This alert comes to us as a result of intelligence obtained from vulnerability data. If we encounter this warning, it means that there is a match between the vulnerabilities in the data and our network applications, SSL certificates, domains, websites, IPs, or 3rd party technologies. If the warning is generated from the CVE data and there is product and version information in which the vulnerability is triggered in the details of the CVE, the accuracy of the alert is very high, immediate action must be taken and the suggested fixes should be applied immediately. The accuracy rate may be slightly lower if the warning is coming from other sources like shodan, etc.

Digital Risk Protection


DRP is the part of XTI that constitutes most of the intelligence for the organization after all the data collected from all the sources are mapped with the attack surface following the interpretation of the data. In this section, we will cover topics such as the protection of brand reputation, threats on the Deep&Dark Web, fraud protection specific to banks, the impact of risks that may occur in any organization in the supply chain, threats to the organization on the web surface and protection for senior executives, and the threats and risks we may face related to these as well as how we should take action against them will be detailed. Below are the alarms that we may encounter within the scope of DRP and the actions we can take:

Potential Phishing Domain Detected

Newly registered domains or previously registered domains with newly created SSL certificates are an intelligence source for us. After interpreting the data obtained from these sources, we encounter this warning for domains with a structure similar to our domains in the intelligence obtained. When we receive this alert, we should investigate the relevant domain in safe environments and determine whether they are mimicking our original content. If these domains mimic our brand and/or content, we should contact the domain registrar and the ISP that hosts the content of the fraudulent site to take it down immediately. If there is nothing suspicious in the content, the domain should still be monitored there is a high potential for that domain to turn into a phishing site.

Rogue Mobile Application Detected

If our organization has mobile applications, we will receive this alert if there is a match with our official mobile application and the data that contains the pirated APK files found on pirated APK sites with similar names and similar content. The APK files transmitted in this alert should be analyzed in a safe environment, and quick remediation action should be taken if they are found malicious. These copycat mobile applications should be taken down immediately to avoid any malicious activities and to protect our brand reputation.

IP Address Reputation

There are multiple reasons that cause the loss of reputation of IP addresses. If we receive this alert it means that there is an incident that occurred affecting our IP reputation. Possible reasons for the loss of the IP reputation are as follows:

If the IP address is blacklisted on any source for any reason,
If the IP address is found in a feed containing harmful IOCs,
If the IP address has been involved in an activity in the torrent network,


then the reputation of the IP address will be lost.

We will receive this alert if any of our IP addresses are among the resources that will cause this reputation loss. If it is a blacklist case, we should investigate the root cause and determine on what sources it has been blacklisted. The root cause of the blacklist should be investigated and eliminated. It will be more risky and harmful if our IP addresses have been found in a feed containing harmful IOCs or involved in the torrent network because our IP addresses could potentially be used in a malicious campaign. This raises the possibility that the organization has been breached. In this case, we must quickly investigate the relevant systems retrospectively and identify the root cause. If the breach has happened, we need to enforce the internal policies.

Impersonating Social Media Account Detected

Social media is a platform that many organizations use to represent themselves. Thousands of new accounts are created every day on these platforms. Not all accounts are created with good intentions. Many accounts may be created with user names that can imitate the original accounts of the organization or with the intention to conduct smear campaigns against the organization. We will receive this alert if we encounter such a situation. In this case, the relevant account should be reviewed and determined whether it is just a name similarity or an attempt to mimic. If the account is being used for fraud or a smear campaign against our organization, we should contact the support team of the relevant social media application and request that this account be closed.

Botnet Detected at Black Market

We receive this alert if any of our organization’s domain or IP addresses is included in the botnet data in the black markets. The user system that became a bot reported in the alert may belong to one of our employees or customers. If the system belongs to a customer, the user’s password should be reset to remediate the incident. If the system belongs to one of our employees forensics investigation should be conducted, the system should be isolated from the network immediately, employee’s network credentials must be reset. Further investigations must be conducted on the system to determine if the system is infected or not.

Suspicious Content Detected at Deep&Dark Web

Deep&Dark web environments are monitored and all data is collected regularly. We receive this alert if there is anything that mentions our organization in the data after the collected data is interpreted. For example, if there is a post on a hacker forum mentioning an attack against our organization, then we can implement security tightening even before the attack occurs. We can avoid the attack totally or get it over with the least damage thanks to these posts. When we encounter this alert, the post that threatens our organization and its content should be analyzed thoroughly, and necessary actions should be taken accordingly.

Suspicious Content Detected at IM Platforms

Instant messaging platforms such as Telegram, ICQ, and IRC are the environments that threat actors use for communication. We receive this alert if there is anything that mentions our organization in the data after the conversations of the threat actors in the public or private groups of these platforms are monitored and the collected data is interpreted. In this case, the conversation or the statement about our organization should be analyzed thoroughly and the context of the mention regarding our organization should be determined. If there is a threat to the organization, necessary actions should be taken quickly.

Stolen Credit Card Detected

It is a common situation for fraud teams of banks. Threat actors steal credit card information by phishing or other ways and share or sell them in the dark web environment. In these types of cases, banks should follow these stolen credit cards well in order to protect their customers. We receive this alert if a stolen credit card number matches with one of the bank’s with the help of the intelligence gathered. In this case, we must inform the fraud teams immediately and take action to cancel the card.

Data Leak Detected on Code Repository

We mentioned that code repositories such as Github, Bitbucket, Azure Blob, and Amazon S3 where we can store data or store codes are one of the sources of intelligence. Sometimes sensitive data for the organization may be forgotten in such environments. We will receive this alert if sensitive and critical data such as an IP address of the organization, domain, database access information, login information that belongs to employees, or if a sensitive report related to the organization is detected in a bucket through the intelligence gathered. In this case, we must take quick action to delete the sensitive data if we manage the relevant repository or bucket. If someone outside of our organization manages it, then, we should go after the takedown option.

Company Related Information Detected on Malware Analysis Services

Public sandboxes are one of the important intelligence sources for the organization to detect malicious files against our organization. Thousands of samples are uploaded and analyzed in these sandboxes every day. A malicious file referring to our organization is crucial for our organization. It may target our organization directly or may have been uploaded by an attacker with the intention of smearing our organization. In these cases, we receive these alerts as a warning for these malicious files that refer to our organization within the collected data and we should investigate and analyze the malicious file and take the necessary actions.

Employee and VIP Credential Detected

These are the warnings that will occur if there is a data leak related to our employees, especially the VIPs that we keep monitoring actively. When we see these alerts we need to apply the password reset process for the relevant users quickly.

Cyber Threat Intelligence
CTI is considered a part of XTI, which is the next-generation threat intelligence. It is a sub-branch of XTI and it is where we can be aware of what is happening in the cyber world in general, where we can learn about current malicious campaigns, the orientation of ransomware groups, or offensive IP addresses around the world. Since it may be difficult to protect our organization with CTI alone, we should support the CTI with our corporate feeds to obtain the most efficient intelligence. We are able to use our SIEM, SOAR, and EDR tools more effectively by integrating them into the CTI feeds and protect our organization better.


THREAT INTELLIGENCE AND SOC INTEGRATION:

Due to its nature, threat intelligence can be integrated into other SOC products easily. As a result of integration, it is possible to use threat intelligence much more effectively. Organizations generally use products like SIEM, SOAR, EDR, and Firewalls under the umbrella of SOC. Each one of these products has different capabilities in its own use. Combining the outputs of these products in order to gain more effective and functional use will produce the best results for us. In this context, integrating the threat intelligence flow with the security products under the SOC framework will provide us with the highest visibility inside and outside of the organization.

For example, the false information/output on the SIEM side can be minimized if the logs collected in SIEM are integrated with the threat intelligence feed and the necessary elimination of data is set up in accordance with this structure. This will help the SOAR products to produce better quality outputs as we minimized the false information on the SIEM. Integrating threat intelligence with EDR will provide great convenience to detect the risks that will occur on end users' devices. The EDR will make much clear and more detailed detection on the systems if the users’ web traffic feeds the threat intelligence. Firewalls are another good example of the SOC and Threat Intelligence integration. if we are able to feed our firewall products, which are used to monitor and manage traffic coming from outside the organization, with threat intelligence, then the Firewalls will be able to take action much faster. If the necessary rules are created for a malicious IP address on it, the firewall will block any traffic that may come from that IP address and the risks will be detected and eliminated right on the spot even before an alert occurs within the SOC security tools.

